From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
[Music]
Heartbreak over the holidays. One of the
two National Guard members shot in the
ambush attack near the White House has
passed away. Now, the suspect In the
days since an immigrant from Afghanistan
gunned down two members of the National
Guard in Washington, D.C.
>> to that shooting, President Trump is
ordering a review of all Afghan
nationals in the US and halting He says
he has halted all asylum decisions after
the ambush attack on the two National
Guard members. President Trump has
ordered a sweeping new crackdown on
immigration. He's also promising to
expel millions of immigrants already
here, revoking their legal status. That
has left almost no corner of the system
untouched. He claimed he's ready to
expel anyone who is, , "not a net
asset to the United States." And he
threatened to end immigration from,
, "all third world countries."
Today.
My colleague, Hamid Al-Azizi, on the
shooter's journey to the United States
and the Trump administration's
wide-ranging response.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Monday, December 1st.
[Music]
Hamid, we are turning to you because
what began as a horrific shooting in
downtown Washington last week has now
become a set of far-reaching changes to
the US immigration system, which you
cover for the times.
Just how far-reaching would you say
these changes are?
Yeah, you know, even for an
administration that has
rewritten all the rules on how to handle
immigration, what we've seen in just the
last couple days has been remarkable.
They have blocked pathways for people to
come to this country, to remain in the
country, and at the same time are going
back and reviewing the records
of people who are have already gained
status in the United States. I haven't
seen anything like this during my time
covering immigration.
That fallout, which we will discuss in
detail in this conversation, because it
very much feels like a template for the
future of immigration policy in the US.
It feels like it very much hinges on the
specific of who the shooter in this case
was, where he came from,
the circumstances of how he came into
the US. So, let's talk about that.
Yeah, the shooter's name is Rahmanullah
Lakhanwal.
He grew up in Afghanistan during this
time period in which the United States
had invaded, you know, in fact, he was
only 5 years old when 9/11 happened, and
of course, we know that the United
States came into Afghanistan shortly
afterward.
During that time, the United States
relied heavily on
local troops, and one of the key groups
that was essential to the United States
presence in Afghanistan was this group
called Zero Unit. Zero Unit, what is
that?
They were basically a CIA-backed
group that hunted Taliban members, were
really highly trained, highly vetted by
the US government, essentially reported
to the US government, and went after key
leaders in the Taliban power structure.
Kind of the tip of the spear when it
comes to the US government and military
in Afghanistan. Exactly. And and Mr.
Lakhanwal was a part of that group. He
was recruited by the CIA to join this
unit, and his brother was a key leader
in the group as well. So, as a family,
you know, they were really enmeshed in
this organization that was essential to
the United States' ability to maintain
security in Afghanistan. But human
rights organizations
criticized the work of this Zero Unit
group.
They alleged that Zero Unit went further
than was necessary, and they called them
death squads. They were conducting
extrajudicial killings,
killing civilians. These are all
allegations that were made during this
time about this group.
And how comfortable were people like
Lakhanwal, Afghans,
in carrying out this kind of alleged
brutality against
other Afghans?
Yeah, what we've learned is that Mr.
Lakhanwal, specifically, really
struggled with the actions that his
group undertook in Afghanistan.
And he expressed this to a friend in
Afghanistan who actually spoke with one
of our colleagues, and this friend said
that Mr. Lakhanwal was going through
some mental health issues. And really,
in his telling, this was clearly
somebody who was traumatized from his
experience as a part of Zero Unit.
But despite that, he remained in this
unit up until the Taliban took over the
country in 2021. Well, bring us to that
very dramatic
moment. What happens to Lakhanwal when
the US announces it's going to withdraw,
which, as we all
remember, then
brings the Taliban
through the country toward Kabul. The
Afghan military
collapses in days, and the US military
flees in what I think we can all agree
is
a kind of chaotic and somewhat
humiliating withdrawal.
For Lakhanwal and other Afghans who
closely helped the United States
government, suddenly they become
targets for the Taliban, and there's
this incredible pressure on the Biden
administration to not leave behind those
people who risked their lives in
protecting the United States government.
Essentially, they are traitors to the
now re-empowered Taliban. Yeah, and Mr.
Lakhanwal, along with other members of
the Zero Unit, were among the first
people to flee Afghanistan and be
brought by the United States government
to America for protection. So, he's
brought to the United States by the
Biden administration. What are his
circumstances like, and what kind of
vetting process occurs before he even
gets to the US?
So, he comes to the United States as
part of a program called Operation
Allies Welcome.
And as part of this program that the
Biden administration set up layers of
vetting. They collected biometrics from
these people, and they ran their
information through US databases for any
potential
terrorism hits, criminal hits, any
potentially derogatory information.
And then, when these individuals came to
the United States,
the Department of Homeland Security
conducted another layer of vetting by
Customs and Border Protection officers
at the airports. So, pretty rigorous.
Pretty rigorous, but at the same time, I
think it's important to note that the
agency's Inspector General found that
the Biden administration had allowed two
people who were potential national
security threats to enter the country
despite that vetting. This was a really
hurried process. This wasn't something
that was planned years in the making,
months in the making. So, there were
clear issues with this program.
Um, and Mr. Lakhanwal comes really
quickly as as one of the first groups of
people to arrive in the United States as
part of this program in September 2021.
He settles down in Bellingham,
Washington, a town that's near the
Canadian border, and he's trying to find
jobs there. He's a delivery driver.
He's staying with his
wife and five children in a apartment
complex that is a place where people who
are down on their luck are trying to
rebuild their lives.
But despite this kind of challenging
circumstances for him, in April,
during the Trump administration, he
gains asylum. So, he enters the US under
the Biden administration, but he is
officially granted asylum under the
Trump administration.
Yeah, you know, the Biden administration
brought these people over from
Afghanistan under a power known as
parole.
This is a temporary status that only
lasts a few years.
It did not provide these Afghans with a
chance to stay in the country
permanently. That was on Afghans
individually in the country to figure
out a way to stay here. And in this
case, he figured it out. Yeah, this was
clearly good news for him to get asylum,
to have a chance to remain in the United
States, to gain a green card, to gain US
citizenship. He was on that pathway.
But the next thing we know is that he
decides to
drive from Bellingham, Washington, all
across the country to
Washington, D.C.,
where he finds himself in
the downtown of the city about a block
or two from the White House.
This is an area that has
a lot of people going through it and
there are restaurants and coffee shops.
And he is walking on the sidewalk near a
bus stop
where he comes across
two National Guard members from West
Virginia.
Sarah Beckstrom, 20-year-old, and Andrew
Wolf, a 24-year-old.
And Mr. Lockenwal decides to pull out
his gun
and shoot both of them multiple times.
As part of that gunfire, he himself
takes on shots.
>> Right. And he is down on the ground.
These shots were heard by colleagues
here at The New York Times. Our bureau
is
very close to the site of the shooting.
And just a day later we found out that
one of the Guard members, Ms. Beckstrom,
had died from her gunshot wounds. And
suddenly all of these
dramas are colliding. The war in
Afghanistan, which Trump loathed as a
forever war. And his use of National
Guard across American cities. It's all
colliding and it's a very strange
moment.
Yeah, definitely. And and you can see
how for President Trump, this is
something that he personally is tied to.
And for him, I think it really confirms
a lot of the claims that he's made in
the past. A lot of his worst fears that
an immigrant from a far-flung country
would come here and and shoot two US
military members
near the White House.
And I think that's really reason for him
and in his mind and his advisers' mind
to undertake a crackdown on the
immigration system that's unlike
anything that we've seen this year.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, Hamed, describe what happens to the
immigration system in the days since
this shooting and how the Trump
administration has explained those
actions.
In the telling of top Trump
administration officials
[Music]
a 29-year-old
Afghan who entered the United States
under Biden's Operation Allies Welcome a
program following the disastrous
withdrawal from Afghanistan. This is
what happens. Including US Attorney
Jeanine Pirro this individual is in this
country for one reason and one reason
alone, the failure to vet in any way,
shape, or form this individual and
countless others. The FBI director, Kash
Patel He was flown in by the Biden
administration in September 2021
on those infamous flights that everybody
was talking about.
Nobody knew who was coming in. Nobody
knew anything about it. His status was
ex- And President Trump himself this
shooting was the result of a series of
Biden administration failures. Not only
in the way that they ended the war,
which President Trump has often
criticized but in the way that they let
these Afghans, including Mr. Lockenwal,
into the country without, in their
words, the necessary vetting.
[Music]
Does the White House point to anything
specific
as they're critiquing the vetting
process? Because, of course, as you told
us a little bit earlier in this
conversation it's the Trump
administration that grants that final
asylum.
Yeah, no, there's nothing specifically
that they're pointing to.
And when President Trump was asked
about, you know, this idea that
they granted this man asylum during his
administration in April Right. he
wouldn't engage with that answer and
again he returned to this idea that
you know, Biden brought him and once
people are brought to this country,
there's not much that they can do.
That's essentially what he said.
Understood. So, let's now turn to the
crackdown that Trump has undertaken to
the immigration system over the past few
days and really understand
the details of it.
Yeah, basically in a matter of days the
Trump administration
takes a series of actions
that have just massive implications.
Mhm. At first, the Department of
Homeland Security announces there's a
pause on all immigration applications
filed by Afghan immigrants. So, for
Afghans in the United States, this means
a pause on their ability to seek a green
card, US citizenship. For them, their
ability to stay in this country
long-term is now on hold. All that's
just being shut down. Temporarily,
perhaps, but shut down. Yes, exactly.
And they build on that. They say they
they will review all asylum applications
that were granted during the Biden
administration. They're No matter which
country the asylum seeker's from. All of
it. They're going to go back and look at
those applications and figure out if
there were any issues with those grants.
And again, building on this idea that
the Biden administration, in their
words, did not do enough vetting. So,
suddenly we're now talking about a pause
not just in those seeking asylum from
Afghanistan but potentially thousands or
tens of thousands of people seeking
asylum from any country in the world.
Exactly. So, they're going back to look
at those records.
And they take it even a step further.
They decide that
actually we're going to review all green
card holders from countries that
President Trump already banned from
travel to the United States. You know,
these were countries like Iran, Eritrea,
Sudan
and others.
So, people who are already in the United
States who've gone through a lot of
process now have their applications
under review. In a sense, this is a
retrospective look back at those who
have, in some cases, already been
granted their green cards. They're
basically saying the old system is
suspect, so we will kind of reopen your
green card. There is definitely that
potential. They're going to go back and
look at potentially hundreds of
thousands of records. Wow. A massive
review. We don't know how this is going
to take shape and how they're going to
do this, but they've announced that they
will do this.
And then on Friday, after they'd already
announced that they were going to review
all the people that had gotten asylum
between 2021 and 2024
but now people already in the United
States trying to gain asylum in the
process, those applications are now on
hold as well. Really going after the
entire asylum system.
And on that same day, the State
Department announces that there will be
no more visas for Afghan nationals.
Cutting off another way for Afghans to
enter the United States.
And in fact, a State Department cable
that we obtained
detailed how Afghan nationals who
already had their visas granted and
printed and were going to be dispersed
to those Afghans, those needed to be
destroyed. Wow.
>> So, they're taking every step possible
to target Afghans not only in America
but abroad.
And not just from what you said Afghans,
but really anyone seeking asylum or a
green card. In a very real sense, it
feels like the entire system of giving
foreigners refuge in the US for
political or economic circumstances is
on pause.
Yeah, you know, what's really remarkable
here is this idea that yes, we're going
to pause a bunch of people from entering
the United States
but we're also going to go back and
we're going to review
people who've already obtained a form of
status in the United States. We're going
to go back and look at those records as
well. So, it's not only prospective but
it's retrospective as well.
Does this administration have the legal
power to do everything you're describing
because it is so sweeping and so
retrospective?
Yeah, these will undoubtedly lead to
legal challenges, especially this idea
of going back. These are people who have
gone through layers of vetting, layers
of interviews extensive interaction with
the US government
that if they take action on those
people, that will lead to, I think,
legal action across the United States.
So, we're going to have to wait and see
how this plays out in our legal system.
I want to return for just a moment to
Afghanistan. Because as broad as some of
these potential changes to our
immigration system are
what stands out to me is what these
changes will mean for the future of that
promise that the US made to Afghans who
helped America in the war. And in the
case of Lockenwal
yes, the promise was kept. But it's
clear from Trump's actions that the
promise won't be kept for anyone else
from Afghanistan in the future. And
there's a very revealing exchange about
this on social media over the past
couple of days that I want to discuss
with you. It begins with an editorial
from the Wall Street Journal, which is a
very conservative editorial board. And
I'm going to read you
what
they wrote in this editorial. Okay.
Quote, "Some will say that the shooting
in downtown Washington means that the
United States should never admit
refugees like Law Ken Wah.
But the alternative is abandoning allies
who assist Americans in war." And the
editorial goes on to say
"You can be sure Americans will fight
overseas again, and our troops will need
allies on the ground to succeed. How
many?" the editorial asks, "will assist
the US if they believe that there will
be no exit for them?" Basically,
this editorial asks, "What happens when
the US just leaves people behind on the
battlefield?"
Yeah, and one person who reads this
editorial and disagrees with it strongly
is the chief of President Trump's
immigration crackdown, Stephen Miller.
He went online on on social media and
said
quote,
"This is the great lie of mass
migration.
You are not just importing individuals,
you are importing societies. No magic
transformation occurs when failed states
borders. At scale, migrants and their
descendants recreate the conditions and
terrors of their broken homelands."
Will you just translate that?
Yeah, I mean, I think what's remarkable
about this tweet is that Miller is not
only turning to
the immigrants themselves who arrive in
the United States, but he's saying that
their children are a threat as well.
Right. And I think it's worth saying
just how much the Wall Street Journal
editorial and Stephen Miller's
statements completely talk past each
other because
the editorial
is saying that American credibility and
the future of our foreign policy
requires us to keep our commitments to
those who risk their lives for the US.
That it's foundational to
our ability to function in the world.
Miller's statement completely bypasses
that and says broken people from broken
societies are just an existential danger
to the US, therefore we can't let them
in. But what Miller's argument doesn't
grapple with at all is the reality that
America played a part, and a pretty big
part, in breaking Afghanistan in the
first place.
Yeah, for Miller, that's besides the
point. It's not about what America owes
people and countries.
It's about who's good for the United
States and who's not good.
People who are from countries that he
has deemed to be failed societies do not
deserve the opportunity to come to
America. Right. It's kind of an open
embrace of collective punishment because
in Law Ken Wah, we clearly have someone
who and we don't quite understand the
mechanics of it, but
becomes at some point in his life
radicalized. But he's just one of
thousands, if not tens of thousands, of
Afghans who the US previously made a
commitment to to protect and bring to
the US. And Trump and Stephen Miller are
now saying
because one of them did this thing,
none of them
can come to the US.
Yeah, exactly. I think that's right.
But I also just want to point out this
idea that like like you're mentioning
collective punishment, these Afghans who
helped the American military have been
supported by veterans. Mhm. You know,
I've spoken with veterans
who have personally tried to bring those
people who helped them, translators and
others, to the United States,
bring them to safety. I mean, the plot
point of this idea of Afghans helping
American military members has been
in movies and shows. Mhm. And for now,
this idea of helping Afghans who helped
the American military in Afghanistan,
that's over.
Just to end, Hamed, I don't want to
entirely lose sight of the National
Guard and its place
in this story.
The second guardsman who was shot
remains in critical condition in a
hospital.
And this deployment of the National
Guard in Washington remains a source of
really profound controversy.
Yeah, this idea of bringing the federal
forces to the city was really opposed by
a lot of citizens in Washington, D.C.
[Music]
But in the days since the shooting,
President Trump has announced that he
was planning to send 500 more National
Guard members to Washington, D.C. Mhm.
So now this deployment,
far from shrinking because of this
shooting,
is now going to expand because of it.
[Music]
Hamed,
thank you very much. We appreciate it.
Thank you for having me.
[Music]
On Sunday, the Secretary of Homeland
Security, Kristi Noem, told NBC News
that the alleged shooter may not have
become radicalized until after he
immigrated to the United States.
That conclusion, if true, could
undermine the Trump administration's
claims that the Biden administration had
failed to properly vet him before he
arrived into the country.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Here's what else you need to know today.
Over the past few days, President Trump
has carried out a series of profoundly
contradictory actions in his war against
drug cartels.
Trump declared in a post on social media
that the airspace above and around
Venezuela, which he is accused of
flooding the US with drugs, should now
be considered closed. It was his latest
threat against the regime of Venezuela's
authoritarian leader, Nicolas Maduro.
But at the same time, Trump announced a
full pardon of a former president of
Honduras, Juan Orlando Hernández, who
has been convicted in US federal court
of conspiring with local drug cartels to
bring vast amounts of cocaine into the
United States.
Meanwhile,
on Sunday, members of Congress from both
parties said that the Trump
administration may have committed a war
crime in its offensive against boats
allegedly carrying drugs in the
Caribbean.
According to the Washington Post,
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth gave a
verbal order to kill everyone aboard
such boats, leading a US military
commander to carry out a second strike
to kill those who had survived an
initial air strike back in September. Do
you believe if there was a second strike
to eliminate any survivors,
that that constitutes a war crime? It
seems to. Uh, if what has been reported
is ac- accurate, I've got serious
concerns about
anybody in that, you know, chain of
command stepping over a line that they
should never step over. You know, going
after survivors in the water. Um,
that is clearly not lawful. Both
Democratic Senator Mark Kelly of Arizona
on CNN and Republican Representative
Mike Turner of Ohio on CBS said that
such a second strike would violate the
rules of war. Obviously, if that
occurred, that would be be very serious,
and I agree that that that would would
be an illegal act. Turner said that the
Post reporting on the second strike
would become the focus of an existing
congressional investigation into the air
strikes on the boats.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Rochelle
Bongja and Mooj Zadie.
It was edited by Patricia Willens with
help from Michael Benoist.
And was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
Contains music by Dan Powell, Mary
Lozano, and Diane Wong.
[Music]
That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]